OnlineHost :  Copyright 1995 America Online, Inc.

OnlineHost :  Tonight Hollywood Online's Inside Hollywood is  pleased to
present Jerry Doyle from Babylon 5. He was born on July 16, the son of a
police officer and a mother who worked at home. His family moved to Jersey
when he was a junior in high school. He has a Bachelor of Science Degree
in Aeronautics from Embry Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona,
Florida. His first job was the marketing and sales of private and
corporate jets for Falcon Jet out of New Jersey. He later became an
investment banker on Wall Street with Drexel Burnham and Prudential Bache
where he stayed nine years. While working on Wall Street, Jerry had a
taste of Hollywood when a friend had suggested him for a part of David
Addison on "Moonlighting." He flew out, got the audition, then got the
part and shot the show, and went back to Wall Street. Three years later in
1990, Jerry decided he wanted to change his career to acting so he moved
to Los Angeles and got an agent.  His first role was on "The Bold and the
Beautiful," then came recurring roles on "Home Front" and "Reasonable
Doubt."  This is his second season on Babylon 5 as the feisty Security
Chief Michael Garibaldi, the trusted protector of the ship who possesses a
murky background.

HOL Live   :  And I'm your hostess for tonight, coming to you live from
Hollywood Online!  We're all being Irish today!  Happy St. Paddy's day to
the folks at O'Shea's in San Francisco!

HOL Live   :  How ya doin, Jerry?

JerryDoyle :  Almost perfect!

Question   :  We've seen a dark vision of Garabaldi's future from the
Babylon Squared episode with Babylon 4.  Is this scene definitely going to
play out, or was it a possible vision of the future?

JerryDoyle :  Yes.

Question   :  How old were you when you started acting? How did you get
into acting?

JerryDoyle :  I started in March on 1990, after 9 years on Wall Street.  I
came to LA.  Started knocking on doors... and concentrated on the business
side of show business...seing as how, I didn't have any of the show-side.

HOL Live   :  Here's one from ASWestvee: 

Question   :  Jerry- you have been attributed as saying that your
character will "go out in  blaze of glory".  Is this true, and have you
said something that you shouldn't have?  : )

JerryDoyle :  No.  Yes and No, actually.

Question   :  Jerry, I think your character is excellent and continues to
have huge potential because of his political position and history.  Where
would _you_ like to see him go from here?  More/less political?  More/less
romantic?  More/less depressed?

JerryDoyle :  I'd like to see the character go more in the areas of action
and romance and definetly not depressed.  Garibaldi's confused about life,
and basically wants a stable relationship and a pay raise.

HOL Live   :  Here's one from Kristi267.. a good followup to your answer
;>

Question   :  Will the Chief ever get the girl?

JerryDoyle :  Why just one?

HOL Live   :  <g>

HOL Live   :  Here's one from RedProbeG: 

Question   :  Babylon 5 is a GREAT show!!  I was just wondering if there
were any big changes in store for next season?

JerryDoyle :  I expect a HUGE pay increase...

HOL Live   :  And here's one from Levinthal..

Question   :  What other work have you done that we might be familiar
with?  It seems like there have been a lot of supporting roles that I have
an image of, bu none of them come to mind.

JerryDoyle :  I did recurring roles on Homefront, Resonable Doubts, 
             and the Bold of the Beautiful, of which I was neither.

Question   :  Jerry, will Garibaldi and Londo's "friendship" maintain as
Londo's character begins to sink deeper into the darkness?

JerryDoyle :  We're at a point where Garibaldi has to distance himself
from Londo. But more important, Garibaldi has to now look back at the
things he said to Londo that he possibly shouldn't have, and also look at
what Londo said to him that he may have missed.  It's kind of like when
you find out you're best friend's screwing your girlfriend.

Question   :  When will we see the Great war that is refered to every
episode?

JerryDoyle :  Soon.

Question   :  Is Your character on B5 close to who you really are?
JerryDoyle :  Certain parts of him are.  I tend to only allow a certain
part of myself to be seen by the general public.  Same with Garibaldi.

Question   :  This is to Mr.Doyle: I am a kid from Hewitt, Tx. adn my pals
and I always watch your show on Wed. nights and I was wondering what it is
like working on a set with all those "alien" make-up artists and stuff???

JerryDoyle :  Yee-haw.  I'll be in Houston April 21, 22, and 23 at
Con-Trol.  Now your answer:  the Special Effect Makeup people do such a
good job, that it allows you as an actor to put aside the obvious, and
interact as if it were just another person, albeit having 3 arms sticking
out of his head.

Question   :  Is there an actual detective character you base Girabaldi
on?

JerryDoyle :  My dad was a New York City cop for 20 years.

Question   :  In SciFi Univ. mag.,Mar95, page28, in the picture of
Londo,it says"Londo was the first one on the show to get laid, laments
actor JD...."  Is *laments* an accurate description of your feelings on
the subject?

JerryDoyle :  I think it was appropriate for Londo to get laid first,
because he has six penises.

HOL Live   :  Wow!!

Question   :  You've said that you don't have a whole lot of experience
acting...do you ever rely on some of the more experienced actors such as
Mira Furlan as "guides"?

JerryDoyle :  I watch every actor I work with and try to incorporate their
nuances, subtleties, and  steal it.

Question   :  What are the things, if any, that you feel make Babylon 5
different from other things on television?

JerryDoyle :  I'm on it.

Question   :  There has been a lot of talk in the media about Sinclair
coming back to the show, is this true??

JerryDoyle :  There's been talk about the incorporation of Sinclair in the
story line but I'm not aware of his coming back to the show.

Question   :  How is the success of B5 affecting your life? Do you now get
recognized everywhere you go?

JerryDoyle :  As the show increases it's audience, your visibility as an
actor increases with it.  Being recognized is part of the job.  Nobody
asked me to get into this business, so if people want to come up and say
hi and shake hands or whatever, I think it's cool.

Question   :  Who came up with the idea of Garibaldi being a Warner Bros.
nut???

JerryDoyle :  Warner Bros. Marketing.

Question   :  From salesman to investment banker to actor, these are big
leaps--who instilled in you the self-confidence to make these changes?

JerryDoyle :  My dad.  For a number of reasons  First off, he and my mom
provided me with a stable, loving home.  Secondly, my dad always did for
others before he did for himself.  He died at 41, never having the chance
to get to the things that he wanted to do for himself.  I was 11 at the
time, and 41 seemed really old.  Now, at 38 it seems really young, so I
decided that I was going to do what I wanted to do when I wanted to do it,
and to the degree that I wanted to do it.  The bottom line is, when you
wake up in the morning, you're already ahead of the game.  So go for it,
don't look back, and if I drop dead right now, I'm sure the people here
would be pretty pissed off (we would), but I'm doing what I want.  And I'm
happy, and that's all you can ask for out of any day.

Question   :  Is Babylon 5 or Star Trek better?

JerryDoyle :  Seing is how Babylon 5 is paying me, the answer is quite
obvious.  What a stupid question.

Question   :  How faithful to the same story line are the comic books? 
I'm ashamed to admit I'm buying them, and the upcoming books are supposed
to talk about Garabaldi's first meeting with Sinclair.  Will you be/have
you been incorporating that information into your character?  How many
times are  you surprised with what's happening?

JerryDoyle :  To the best of my knowledge, there are 3 novels out, 
             and 3 or 4 comic books, but I haven't read any of it.

Question   :  As an actor, how do you deal with all of the technobabble?
Do they help you?

JerryDoyle :  I don't try to understand - I just say it.

Question   :  Do you or have you read Science Fiction?  (Are you a fan?)

JerryDoyle :  Believe it or not, I've never seen any of the Star Treks,
never read any science fiction material and still don't.

Question   :  What's the funniest thing that's happen on B5?   That you
can tell, that is.
JerryDoyle :  If you can get your hands on any of the blooper reels, and I
know they're floating around out there, you'll see there's too much fun
stuff to pick out just one.

Question   :  Give us a typical day on the set

JerryDoyle :  Show up at 6: 30.  Eat a greasy breakfast. Make-up. 
Wardrobe.  Talk.  Smoke.  Talk.  Smoke.  Talk.  Smoke.   Talk.  Smoke. 
Lunch.  Talk.  Smoke.  Go home at 7: 30.  Drink.  Smoke.  Drink.  Smoke. 
Then sex, sex, sex.

Question   :  Congratulations on your engagement!  Has it been easier or
harder to work with Andrea now that you're in a relationship with her?

JerryDoyle :  It's much harder to get us out of the trailor...

Question   :  Do you like the story line of war of this season vs. the
peace keeping nature of the first season?

JerryDoyle :  Conflict is always good for drama.  And we shure as hell got
conflict.

Question   :  Who do or did you enjoy working with the most in the first
season?  In the second season?

JerryDoyle :  Check previous answer.

Question   :  Are there going to be any more captains?

JerryDoyle :  I haven't read the bible. (the bible for the story)  But I
can't imagine there being any change.

Question   :  From Cadet Dau..                   Mr.  Doyle...are you
interested in Astronomy?

JerryDoyle :  No.

Question   :  After the Betrayal by his Aide, does Garibaldi REALLY trust
anyone?  Who?

JerryDoyle :  Who wrote this?  Do I know you?
JerryDoyle :  Maybe I shouldn't answer...
JerryDoyle :  ...
JerryDoyle :  ...
JerryDoyle :  Paranoid, me?  No...


OnlineHost :  To send your question to the speaker, click on the Interact
icon, then use the Ask a Question option.

Question   :  Can you tell us more of the Geribaldi's history...some
things that don't show up in your regular episode?

JerryDoyle :  Garibaldi's bounced around the universe, because he's not
really politick, distrusts authority, and hates the abuse of it, and
basically doesn't like to take any crap, and that's causes him problems in
both relationships and career.

Question   :  Do you have plans for any projects during the next hiatus? 
Or after the five year arc for that matter?

JerryDoyle :  If we get word that the show is coming back for a third
season, I plan to take the three months off and travel.  If we're not
coming back, I'll probably still take three months off, but probably not
spend as much.  After that, who knows.

Question   :  B5 has a lot of great mysteries are they going to be
"closed" in a movie or in an epsoide.

JerryDoyle :  My understanding is that all characters, plot points, and
story lines, will be resolved by the last episode of the fifth year.

Question   :  Do any of the B5 people have a history with role-playing
games?  There seems to be an influence in some of the "in jokes on screen.

JerryDoyle :  I'm sorry, but I don't understand the question...

Question   :  Jerry, Babolyn 5 dosen't seem to get the press that other
shows in the sci/fi arena receive.  Why is that?

JerryDoyle :  That's more a question for the PR and marketing people.  All
we can do is put out the best product we can.  Then it's up to other
people to help it along.

Question   :  Any aspirations for a Major Motion Picture like the Star
Trek films for Babylon  5?

JerryDoyle :  I've heard some talk about a feature at the end of the fifth
year, but there's nothing set at this pt.

Question   :  Might Garibaldi and Ivanova get together???

JerryDoyle :  I kind of doubt it.  But, you never know.

Question   :  In involvement in B5, what moment do you look back on as
your best work, what you were most proud of?

JerryDoyle :  I was most proud of the day I got the job.

Question   :  Jerry there is much mistery and an obvious cover-up
surronding the death of the president, will we learn moreof the conditions
of this and what if any clues can you give us to these events

JerryDoyle :  Trust Garibaldi's information on this one.  There's going to
be a very interesting revelation, probably before this season ends.

Question   :  Jerry, did you try out for any of the other roles on B5
before getting the role of Garibaldi?

JerryDoyle :  No.

Question   :  What is your favorit alien race on the show?

JerryDoyle :  Gotta be the Centauri.  Bald women are kinda hot.

Question   :  Babylon 5 has a more epic, ongoing story line than most of
the other science fictions shows that focus on one shot plots.  Would you
like more variety than the constant story being played out on B5?

JerryDoyle :  I like things just the way they are.

Question   :  B5 is very much an ongoing, developing project, building on
past episodes.  How much information do you as an actor get in advance as
to what is going to happen, and how far in advance?

JerryDoyle :  Like I said earlier, I haven't read the bible (story bible)
so I don't really know where the story line is headed.  As far as scripts
go, we get them about a week before they shoot.  I typically don't read
the script until we start shooting it.

Question   :  Do you enjoy the tecno effects on the show? Or do you think
they are over done?

JerryDoyle :  It won an emmy!

Question   :  Who is your favorite actor/actress?

JerryDoyle :  Humphrey Bogart/Andrea Thompson.

Question   :  Jerry, do you find there are any real differences in working
on a syndicated program versus the typical network variety?

JerryDoyle :  The mechanics of television, to me, have little to do with
the process.  What's important is the product.   And whether it's network
or syndicated, you have to deliver, or you're gone.

Question   :  What other projects will we see you in in the near future?

JerryDoyle :  None at this time.

HOL Live   :  BFried989 wants to know if you like meeting your fans, and
some information on the upcoming Texas con..

JerryDoyle :  Yeah, I like meeting them.
JerryDoyle :  As far as Texas goes, it's someplace in Houston, April 21,
22, and 23.  I don't have any phone numbers or addresses with me.  But
perhaps, Linda Shapley, my illustrious director of the Garibaldi and
Company Fan Club might.

JerryDoyle :  I'm sure you'll be able to find her on the 'net.

Question   :  Sorry if this has been asked already but why exactly did the
actor who played Sinclair leave the show, I was really starting to like
him.

JerryDoyle :  Ask him.

Question   :  Will we see any more episodes involving B4 any time soon?

JerryDoyle :  Sorry, but I'm not sure.

Question   :  What kinds of roles do you want to tackle outside the Bab 5
arena?

JerryDoyle :  Roles that pay me $10 million a picture.  Seriously, I've
always wanted to do a pirate movie.

HOL Live   :  Jerry - How do you like communicating through cyberspace,
such as in this sort of live chat?

JerryDoyle :  It's cool - I don't have to shave.

HOL Live   :  And our last question for this evening.. Cathuse wants to
know what's your favorite episode.

Question   :  What aspect of Garibaldi is the most difficult for you to
portray as an actor?

JerryDoyle :  My favorite episode was the first episode of the second
season.  I was in a coma, said nothing and got paid the same.

JerryDoyle :  The sober part.
JerryDoyle :  (Happy St. Patrick's Day)

HOL Live   :  Thanks for coming this evening, Jerry.  Any closing comments
to our audience?

JerryDoyle :  Thanks for watching the show and for you're continued
support.  I hope you guys have as much fun watching the show as we do
making it.

JerryDoyle :  See ya!

OnlineHost :  Our thanks to Jerry Doyle from Babylon 5 for  appearing
online tonight and to Hollywood  Online's Inside Hollywood for arranging
this conference.  A transcript of this chat will be made available in the
Hollywood Online Inside Hollywood Press Conference Transcript area within
the next 24 hours. Next week, Hollywood Online presents:  Pauly Shore -
March 21 Taylor Hackford, director of "Dolores Claiborne" on March 22 An
OSCARS Special featuring the debut of the weekly Film Scouts Chat! Join
the Critics' Roundtable as famous film critics from all over the world
make their Oscar picks!  The audience will be invited onstage to
participate!  Don't forget - March 27th - the Hollywood Online Oscars
Party!  Win fabulous prizes and join Hollywood Online, Kim Komando, Motley
Fool, The Trivia Club and other great areas on AOL as we give you thebest
Online Oscars Party!  Prizes include Forrest Gump soundtracks and a
special private chat with a Hollywood agent and a special celebrity guest!
 From Anna Valdez and the rest of Hollywood Online..  Good Night, America!

OnlineHost :  Copyright 1995 America Online, Inc.


Transmitted: 95-08-07 23:46:43 EDT

