JMS CompuServe messages collected by The Green Meddler <kilgalen@tde.com>.


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  B. Blyth, 76350,2717		Sunday, October 01, 1995 7:46:19 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#353246

     "I don't think that (B5) would be doing too well if it was a clone of ST."

     (Actually, that should be *were*, not *was*...just to be pedantic.)

     That is, in a nutshell, part of the problem we faced going in.  On the
one hand, you have the ST fans who, understandably, hadn't heard about what
B5 was, or that it preceded DS9 by 5 years.  (This thanks to the new PR
philosophy at Warner Bros., which strives to create the notion of stealth
programming...that which cannot be picked up on radar, sonar, TV or infrared
motion detectors.)  Not their fault, in other words.  Thinking the show was
just a DS9 ripoff, many of them opted out...again, understandably, given the
circumstances.

     Then you have those viewers who tuned in expecting to see something
like ST, found it wasn't, and decided we weren't doing ST or SF correctly
because of that, and did a fast fade.

     Finally you had the non-ST fans, who assumed it was just like ST (in
some cases in part because some of the comments lent themselves to that; one
station astonishingly enough even said, "From the creators of DS9," which
probably astonished Berman/Pillar about as much as it did me), and thus
didn't check it out, assuming it was just more of the same.

     Consequently...we fell between three chairs.  It has taken time for
people to get the word about what the show *really* is (mainly word of
mouth; to some extent we are still a stealth program).  As they've made that
discovery, a task no less daunting than the first trans-Atlantic crossing by
canoe, our audience has grown slowly but steadily.

     TeeVee...it's a mug's game, Brenna.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5, in general			Section: Star Trek
  To:  TazDevil, 102671,2161		Monday, October 02, 1995 12:05:27 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#353635

     No ill will was taken, or is extended.

     Actually, it seems to me, what you're really talking about is not the
show's maturity, but your *familiarity* with the characters, two different
things.  The more you see them, the more backlog of information you have to
appreciate their actions.  Very often, on many series, it's not so much a
question of the actors getting comfortable with their characters as the
*audience* getting comfortable with them.  Many of the same folks who
initially didn't like Sinclair, after they got to know the character, went
back to re-watch the first episodes and found that there's depth they didn't
appreciate there, visible now because they know who the character is.

                                                               jms


Subj:  VitW pt2 - Delenn/Londo?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Neville White, 100335,2721	Monday, October 02, 1995 9:12:13 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#354530

     The favor is called in in season three, in one of the earlier episodes.
It may surprise you....

                                                                       jms


Subj:  VitW pt2 - Delenn/Londo?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Neville White, 100335,2721	Tuesday, October 03, 1995 4:25:08 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#355007

      I'd imagine (just a guess) that B5 will restart in the UK around April
or thereabouts.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  VitW pt2 - Delenn/Londo?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Anne L. Warner, 71513,1177	Wednesday, October 04, 1995 3:13:31 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#356195

     "Is this important?"

     What isn't?

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 or ST, why not both?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Timothy J. Scallon, 102775,510	Monday, October 02, 1995 9:12:30 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#354531

     Your motives in asking the question are beyond doubt; your intent is
clearly sincerely motivated.  It's just that it's been asked so many times
in broad strokes that it's become difficult and leads to flame-wars.

     When one says "what's being done wrong" with another show, then you've
instantly got a value judgement that leads right to subjective argumentation
rather than analysis.  But if you can somehow structure the discussion so
that is analyzes the writing of each show independently, comparing and
contrasting certain techniques or plot elements, more power to you.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Shadow Ship Progression		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Tuesday, October 03, 1995 12:28:14 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#354832

      No, that ain't it...you'll have a better notion of the reason why the
deeper you get into the first batch of new episodes.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  VitW pt2 - Delenn/Londo?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Wednesday, October 04, 1995 3:13:01 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#356196

     You'll see it in "A Day in the Strife."

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Midpoint				Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Richard M. Perry, 76461,2737	Wednesday, October 04, 1995 3:13:03 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#356198

      Yeah, a follow-up is a possibility, but the odds on it ever happening
are slim and none, I suspect.

     I think Ruby's Masks has done some new masks for Halloween.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Majel Barrett on B5		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Lynn Dimock, 74471,3131		Wednesday, October 04, 1995 3:13:12 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#356200

     Re: "Comes the Inquisitor" (and I'm not sure whether to address this to
you or Rae, not quite having caught the top of this)...when I wrote that
episode, I figured it'd get some strong reactions.  What I did not expect
was the comment, which I've now received from a number of women -- women who
sat stoically through "Believers" and "Confessions and Lamentations" -- that
they were in tears over "Inquisitor."

     So I'd be curious to know what caused that reaction.  I think I may
have subconsciously tapped something there -- the search for identity at its
most emotional core, or just that it's Delenn -- and I'm trying to get a
better sense of what that is.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5: Final Year???		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  peter  stathis, 102477,3046	Wednesday, October 04, 1995 3:31:29 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#356204

     What's necessary is to understand that the syndication picture has
changed a bit since B5 hit the airwaves.  There are far more programs on now
for stations to choose between (which is why B5 is now airing only once a
week in most markets, to allow stations to include more and different
programs in their line-ups).

     The first year, we only had to sustain our ratings to be renewed for
year two; in year two, we only had to grow modestly to be renewed for year
three; in year three, with all the new programs now available, and WB and
UPN and PTEN and FOX fighting it out for the few remaining slots, we have to
do even better.

     This is the dilemma of *every* TV series, not just B5.  You grow in the
ratings, or you get canceled; networks or syndication, that's the rule. All
we can do is continue to make the best show we can, and hope enough people
hear about it to come and check it out...because if they do, in most cases
they stick around.

     So this is a *very* important time for us; if you have friends who
haven't yet seen the show, give 'em a call and invite them to the party.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  Bette A. Loukakis, 102513,3065	Thursday, October 05, 1995 3:03:15 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#357394

     Thanks.  It's actually not that big a burden, since except for the Work
I have no life that has yet been detected by modern science...

                                                                        jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  Tom Knudsen, 72347,1626		Wednesday, October 04, 1995 1:13:06 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#356199

     I understand your point of view that point of view is no less valid
than any other point of view...and note that the point of view about point
of view offered from this end elicited "I don't necessarily agree with
that," because that point of view is not a point of view which coincides
with your own point of view, thus is viewed by you as a not necessarily
valid criticism, which fundamentally reinforces my original statement, from
my point of view.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  Rodney, 73457,3544		Wednesday, October 04, 1995 3:14:19 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#356674

     It came out of an original announcement that Majel Barrett Roddenberry
would be guest-starring on a B5 episode, and kinda grew from there, so the
start of the thread was definitely ST related.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  William H. DiPaola, 76521,1751	Wednesday, October 04, 1995 7:04:25 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#356962

     By all means, repost away.  It's gone out now, so it's fine.  As for
the B5 AOL site, I'm told it'll be up by mid-month.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5: Final Year???		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  SysOp Dupa T. Parrot, 70040,104	Thursday, October 05, 1995 3:03:12 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#357393

     The only reason the ratings have slipped (which they never mention in
the trades) is that we've been in reruns since *MAY*, just running the same
18 episodes over and over and over.

     We'll get a better picture in a few weeks.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Vir leaving?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Mark Sloan, 100407,3462		Wednesday, October 04, 1995 3:14:14 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#356673

     Vir appears in multiple episodes this year, working around his schedule
on "Misery Loves Company."

                                                                       jms


Subj:  KCOP & B5?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Richard Cunningham, 71213,3504	Thursday, October 05, 1995 3:03:16 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#357395

     B5 starts showing new eps next Wednesday at 9, right after DS9; check
your local TV Guide, you'll find an ad there.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  JOE  M VANCE, 74203,1254		Thursday, October 05, 1995 10:58:26 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358419

      Thanks, and I think they already have picked up a few lessons; which is
the point of the exercise...we should challenge one another to constantly
improve, or what's the point of being here?

                                                                       jms


Subj:  KCOP & B5?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Stephen C. Smith, 76150,1170	Thursday, October 05, 1995 10:58:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358416

     Well, y'know...it's gonna be interesting.  I was pleased to note that
TV Guide gave B5's return next week a listing in the evening's highlights.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Shadow Ship Progression		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Thursday, October 05, 1995 10:58:20 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358417

     Yes, the first batch of eps from season 3, up through 9 or so, give a
lot more background on the shadow ships, what they are and how they work.
And as you say, virtually everything in this show is here for a reason;
there's an offhand remark from Garibaldi in "Infection" about his long
struggle out of the Martian desert that pays off in both the comic, and in a
third-season episode.  So some of the year three stuff was being set up as
early as episode 2 of year 1, in what was designed to look like just plain
old throwaway dialogue.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  David Scarpa, 73672,2136		Thursday, October 05, 1995 10:58:28 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358420

     Yeah, the rerun schedule was a pain in the butt.  And because of it,
lots of stations began moving us around.  It's my hope that that'll change
now that we're back with new eps, and showing 9 eps in a row without a
single break.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Thursday, October 05, 1995 10:58:06 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358421

     If I had to look back at season 2 and pick favorites, they'd probably
be "The Long, Twilight Struggle," "Comes the Inquisitor," and "The Coming of
Shadows."  "Coming" is probably the one episode I'd say is most perfect, the
most purely B5.

     In year one, I thought there were a couple/three eps that just lay
there and begged to be shot and put out of their misery.  But I don't think
we had even one like that in year two.  Some were stronger than others, but
not one dropped below a certain median high point over year one.

     So far, year three is another general step up, with our least episode
this season so far being the equal of some of the better year two episodes.

     What makes for a perfect episode of B5 in my view?  It's kinda hard to
define.  It's an episode where major and irreversible events take place,
which were absolutely set up from what went before, and which turn on the
individual choices made by our characters; episodes that have about them the
feel of a car absolutely out of control, that ANYthing could happen...the
kind of episode that makes you start insinctively reaching for the brake
pedal, but it doesn't do any good.  And, finally, those that have a nice
visual sense of style.  I've gradually grown more consistently fond of the
montage as a dramatic device, though I'm being careful not to over-use it.
(I *really* liked the intercutting in the Emperor's fall in "Coming.")

     I'd rather not say anything at all about "Gethsemane," because a large
part of the plot turns on something you need to discover mid-viewing, and
anything I might say would only detract from it.  It's a lovely, sad, very
moving story; it's kind of my Twilight Zone story in the B5 universe, with
some very strong emotional twists as we go along.  It's not the kind of
story I get to do within the B5 structure very often, and I'm extremely
pleased with this one (and Adam Nimoy did a *bang-up* job directing it; he
thinks it may be his best work ever).

     We're now shooting episode #7, "Exogenesis."  So far, to give my own
reactions to the year 3 episodes so far:

     "Matters of Honor," somewhat of a continuation of the year two season
ender, picking up the pieces, with some great action pieces, mainly a fair
amount of fun, which is necessary given what precedes it..."Convictions," a
moody, atmospheric, driving piece, stylistically very different for us, with
some hysterically funny scenes juxtaposed against some deadly serious and
gritty drama..."A Day in the Strife," a fair number of threads, a day in the
life episode with everything that can go wrong going wrong, some elements of
humor but mainly a straight-ahead kind of episode..."Voices of Authority,"
you'll see some of our characters doing stuff they've never done before, and
we get into the whole question of the First Ones, also fairly straightfoward
in storytelling and direction..."Passing Through Gethsemane," which again is
just an utter knockout episode, which with "Convictions" comes close to
being a perfect episode..."Dust to Dust," haven't seen the director's cut
yet, but the dailies looked great...and "Exogenesis," which we just started
filming this week, is probably our most "ordinary" story of the batch,
though it puts a new spin on several traditional story elements.

     On just about every level, I'd say that the year three episodes are an
improvement on the year two episodes, and we've got a lot more this season
that should be equal to or better than "Coming" and the other top three
mentioned earlier, at least based on how they look pre-shooting..."Messages
From Earth," and "Severed Dreams" are massive action/character set pieces on
the scale of "The Long, Twilight Struggle"...only bigger, and more
personal.

     It's going to be great.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  VitW pt2 - Delenn/Londo?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Richard M. Perry, 76461,2737	Thursday, October 05, 1995 10:58:07 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358422

      The favor he calls in is not on his behalf, but on behalf of an associate.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Rick Berman			Section: Star Trek
  To:  Michael Ogrinz, 71573,3153	Thursday, October 05, 1995 11:25:16 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358450

     "The ratings for B5 never get close to the ratings for the Trek shows."

     Actually, not true.  The Neilsens have often posted the B5 ratings as
asometimes equal to or slightly above the ratings for "Voyager."

                                                                       jms


Subj:  VOYAGER'S BAD TREK		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Mary Taylor, 75530,2650		Thursday, October 05, 1995 11:25:18 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358451

     Speaking of TPTB, here's an interesting angle on the whole Voyager/DS9
dynamic.

     Recently, more and more, the ST execs (people like Berman and Pillar)
have been commenting publicly about the factionalization of the SF TV
marketplace, and how this has diminished the numbers for the ST shows
overall.  Most interestingly, one of them commented in an LA Times article
this past week that a big problem for them is the factionalization *within*
ST...that people may only have time to watch one version of ST that week,
and they're being forced to choose.  And, of course, there are the debates
between the two sides on quality.

     Which dovetails precisely into the rumor running around town that
Paramount is considering giving the axe to DS9 after this season, in order
to force folks who want their ST to watch Voyager...because they have more
money invested right now in Voyager, particularly in start-up, and they have
their hopes for the Paramount network pinned to Voyager as their center.
They don't like the idea of a syndicated show out there causing problems for
the network on which they've spent millions and millions of dollars.  And
DS9's ratings have been steadily on the decrease since the debut.  So the
logic goes: take away DS9, and make those who want Trek go to Voyager as the
sole provider of that.

     Given the sources from whom this has come, I give very high credibility
to the notion that this *is* being discussed; whether or not it will be
implemented, that only time will tell.  If Voyager continues to decrease,
threatening the foundations of Paramount's bid for a network, I'd think the
chances of this happening will continue to rise.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  William H. DiPaola, 76521,1751	Friday, October 06, 1995 1:56:11 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358892

     William: you may want to consider scaling back the Trekker hits just
a bit; I understand the emotions, but I think we've moved beyond that.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  KCOP & B5?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Anthony Ho, 72440,1650		Saturday, October 07, 1995 12:36:08 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#359556

     The local ads are the responsibility of the local stations.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Jeannette Fornadel, 76371,3057	Saturday, October 07, 1995 12:36:12 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#359557

     I'd also put "Grail" in my list of least-favorite eps from year one,
along with "Infection" and "War Prayer."

     We're shooting the two-parter as 15 and 16, but airing them as 13 and 14,
in order to accommodate the need to have the same director do both halves.
It's a matter of working around the schedule of directors when they're
available, and that's when Adam's available.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  VOYAGER'S BAD TREK		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Mary Taylor, 75530,2650		Friday, October 06, 1995 8:19:24 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#359294

     Actually, let me correct myself on one point; just to be sure of my
quote, I went back and checked the LA Times article, and the most pertinent
comment came not from Berman/Piller but from Kerry McCluggage, who is the
Chairman of the Paramount Pictures Television Group (i.e., the man who makes
all the final decisions on the life and death of the Mountain's syndicated
series, and the UPN series).

     McCluggage, the article states, "pointed out that Next Generation and
the original Star Trek series still air in repeats in hundreds of markets.
'If you on some level buy the concept that there's a finite number of Star
Trek viewers, who only have so much time to watch their favorite program,
it's going to split the pie a little bit."

     Offered in the interests of accuracy.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  VOYAGER'S BAD TREK		Section: Star Trek
  To:  William H. DiPaola, 76521,1751	Saturday, October 07, 1995 12:36:07 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#359555

     Oh, there's no question that they need to bring up the ratings on DS9,
that's a separate issue, however.  They need the ratings up because
Paramount sells ads based on figures determined by ratings.  They've
promised certain levels of ratings, and if the show doesn't pull those
numbers, they have to give money *back*.  So it's definitely in their
interests to keep the ratings up for as long as the show is on the air.

     And, again, this is more the corporate POV of the situation.  The
potential revenue for their new network *far* outmatches what any single
syndicated show could pull in, and if the latter poses any kind of threat to
the former...it ain't a contest.  Even Berman, in the same article, wonders
if they may have come close to "going to the well too often."

     So we'll have to see...clearly, many of those involved with the show
want it to continue, as do the fans...we'll have to see if the corporate
types feel the same way.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 Wallpaper??			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  William H. DiPaola, 76521,1751	Friday, October 06, 1995 1:56:15 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358893

     In about 4 weeks there will be an official B5 screen saver from Sound
Source, which has 150 images/wallpaper sources, .avi and .wav files.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Katsulas/Mahabharata?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Elyse M. Grasso, 70302,3304	Friday, October 06, 1995 2:03:22 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358899

     Yikes, I haven't got a clue on that one.  When I see Andreas next, I'll
try to remember to ask him, assuming it doesn't fall out of my head in the
meantime, a good probability.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 Aliens			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Chad Underkoffler, 102512,1310	Friday, October 06, 1995 2:12:08 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#358911

     Just to clarify...Sinclair was a Catholic, taught by Jesuits; Garibaldi
is basically an atheist.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 Aliens			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Jeannette Fornadel, 76371,3057	Saturday, October 07, 1995 12:53:13 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#359569

     "...the only B5 race that I find myself occasionally getting annoyed
with is the Earthers."

     Good.

     Because anything else is 'way too easy.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Re: B5 Comic			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Asha DeVelder, 76703,4322	Saturday, October 07, 1995 12:53:12 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#359568

      As noted elsewhere, there are going to be more B5 comics as one-shots
and miniseries...Tim DeHaas is doing one set during the Earth/Minbari War (I'm
doing a lot of consulting on that one to provide canon background on who was
where, when, doing what), and I've begun a 4-issue mini tentatively entitled
"The Book of the War," which chronicles much of our new Ranger character.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Jeannette Fornadel, 76371,3057	Saturday, October 07, 1995 9:54:07 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#360514

     How long to write a script varies; sometimes a couple weeks, sometimes
just 3-4 days; sometimes less if my back's against the wall, but that's
fairly rare.  Often the ones I write very quickly are better than the ones I
write slowly, because I get it out before I lose track of the fingerprints
of the characters and the passion of the story.

     Once completed, it's anywhere from 3-5 weeks before shooting begins,
which is a luxury in TV...most shows the director doesn't get the script
until a few days before shooting.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Re: B5 Comic			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Anne L. Warner, 71513,1177	Saturday, October 07, 1995 9:53:19 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#360510

     I'll try to announce them as they come.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Fan Club, Magazine		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Anne L. Warner, 71513,1177	Saturday, October 07, 1995 9:53:15 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#360508

     Yes, the B5 magazine is coming out from Sendai in the next month or so.
I've read the copy for the first issue, and what I like is that it's not an
obvious puff piece; it asks some tough questions, and doesn't soften the
language or image of the characters on this show behind the scenes.  I told
them, when they got the license, right up front, nothing is taboo, write
about whatever you want.  The first issue, by nature, is more or less an
introduction, with profiles of most of our core cast, but my guess is that
more in-depth pieces will be coming in subsequent issues.

     We finally got the paperwork on the B5 fan club, and have to make some
minor adjustments, but should have the contracts revised and signed within
the next week or so.  Shortly after that, we'll have an AOL page, and not
long thereafter a web page for signups; we'll also try and integrate those
fan clubs already out there as official branches, should they so desire.

                                                               jms


Subj:  Life spans			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Rae Augenstein, 72752,1653	Saturday, October 07, 1995 9:53:18 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#360509

     Minbari live to about 150 or so; she's about 50, very young still in
Minbari terms (what we would consider a young woman in human terms).

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 Wallpaper??			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Saturday, October 07, 1995 9:53:20 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#360511

     I think it's windows 3.1 compatible.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 Encyclopaedia			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Saturday, October 07, 1995 9:53:21 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#360512

     It fell by the wayside when Compton's cut back its list to 30 titles,
and we got too busy on the show to pursue it.  There are several companies
now bidding on the cd-rom, so we'll see what happens.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Saturday, October 07, 1995 9:54:00 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#360513

     Visually, yeah, I'd have to say TFoN is one of our biggest from year
two, and I'm quite fond of it; the only reason that it isn't in my top three
is because while the last half is very intense, it takes a little bit to get
there; I like 'em intense from the first frame on.

     For the growing use of montage/intercutting...it's really just a
process of continuing to learn my craft.  So I try out and experiment with
different techniques.  While I love dialogue, and lots of it, I'm also
coming more and more to appreciate moments where you *only* play the
visuals, and the music, and get out of the way of the Moment.

     At this point, we have the first 5 in various stages of completion; we
deliver 1 and 2 this coming Tuesday; we've finished all the EFX in #3 except
for the placement of a couple of sound effects and the placement of music
cues; we're still getting in EFX for #4, and just finished the producers'
cut on #5.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Shadow model spotted!		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Simon Grierson, 100407,2075	Sunday, October 08, 1995 1:42:08 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#360656

     Any shadow ship model -- for that matter, ANY B5 resin model -- is not
licensed and is basically pirate merchandise.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  12 Steps Program?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Anne L. Warner, 71513,1177	Monday, October 09, 1995 1:17:16 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#362252

     Michael's kind of stubborn and independent and doesn't generally go in
for group sessions.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Re: B5 Comic			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Anne L. Warner, 71513,1177	Monday, October 09, 1995 1:17:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#362253

     Nobody else here is sufficiently crazy to be on-line all the time.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  WOTW: DS9 Imitates B5?		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Jeannette Fornadel, 76371,3057	Monday, October 09, 1995 1:31:21 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#362273

     Of course, the one good thing to come out of all this is what I've been
saying all along...that the presence of lots of SF shows will cause more
competition between the shows, with the ultimate beneficiary of this being
the audience.

     Case in point: from day one, B5 has always shown the station very busy,
with lots of ships going and coming.  One of the concerns voiced by many DS9
fans, quite logically, was that if this was such a busy station, why did we
not see any ships docking at the station, a sense of being busy?  Well,
finally, we now see the new open to DS9 where they show a fair number of
ships moving in and out.  We've been doing lots of scenes with huge numbers
of ships dating back to the pilot movie; now in the season debut, they've
come to the plate and shown big numbers of ships.  Granted that several of
the big shots were recycled throughout the course of the episode (watch for
the wide shot where you see a Klingon ship in front of the crowd moving
right to left, for instance), still it's a strong effort.

     Our presence gives them some competition to do more, and as they come
up to the plate to do just that, it challenges *us* to rise to the occasion
as well, so it's a good back-and-forth.

                                                                        jms


Subj:  WOTW: DS9 Imitates B5?		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Jeannette Fornadel, 76371,3057	Monday, October 09, 1995 4:55:06 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#362470

     Fred Allen, a man considerably before your time, once observed,
"Imitation is the sincerest form of television."

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Shadow Ship Progression		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Hugh Kennedy, 70042,710		Monday, October 09, 1995 1:31:23 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#362274

     The color of the jump gates is kept consistent with the phenomenon of
red shift; objects moving away quickly take on a red hue, those coming
toward you take on a blue aspect.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 Pot Luck Party in NH		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Anne L. Warner, 71513,1177	Monday, October 09, 1995 5:06:31 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#362480

     If you're going to have something this big, with that great a video and
audio system, maybe you ought to consider holding this one week later for
"The Long Twilight Struggle," which benefits hugely from this kind of
treatment, and will, I suspect, have a much bigger reaction from those
attending.  Just a thought....

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Tuesday, October 10, 1995 12:49:22 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#363120

     Re: craft...it's not any one area per se, really, just a lot of little
things.  "Trifles make perfection, and perfection is no trifle."
Michelangelo.  So I keep trying one technique or another, working to get a
little better, or add different tools to my toolbox.

     Favorite visual moments?  The last shots in the second major action
piece in TLTS (the through the window stuff).  The Emperor's fall in CoS.
Delenn and Sheridan embracing, and Lennier's exit from the isolation area
in C&L.  Some of the staging in CtI.

     We just have to continue to get better, and never look back.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Tuesday, October 10, 1995 12:49:24 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#363121

     No, "Severed Dreams" is episode #10.

     I think really that "War Prayer" was so thoroughly ruined for me by the
direction, as was "Grail," that I can't see past that aspect.  We spent
hours and hours in the editing room, trying to make those work, and it was a
major league pain in the butt.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  VOYAGER'S BAD TREK		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Lawrence Roberts, 73200,2174	Tuesday, October 10, 1995 12:50:01 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#363122

     Absolutely not.  I don't think the audience is facionalized, really; I
think there's *plenty* of room for SF, but it has to be SF *done well*.

     See, that's the difference in how execs think (if I can use that term);
if a cop show dies, they say, "Well, that one show didn't work."  If an SF
series dies, they say, "There's no market for SF in television."

     I think that the audience can handle lots of SF, if it's quality.

     BTW, though I normally don't have a chance to catch the ST shows, with
rare exceptions, I did manage to catch tonight's Voyager...and I have to say
that this was probably the best I've seen to date.  The dialogue was crisp
and funny and insightful, the story worked (even though the plot per se was
nothing to write home about), the bits played...I quite enjoyed it.  I'd
love to see them do more of this kind of thing.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Keeping B5 ALIVE			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Charles Agius, 72712,3572	Tuesday, October 10, 1995 3:29:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#363574

     The series is fine as it is.  The changes you suggest would simply make
into a gimmick show, action without substance.  Then it wouldn't be the show
that people like...so what's the point?  I'd rather have it the show I mean
it to be, and die, than compromise and go on.  What we need, primarily, is
good PR to let people know what we're doing.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Keeping B5 ALIVE			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Charles Agius, 72712,3572	Wednesday, October 11, 1995 1:33:26 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#364227

     Oh, I won't defend the delay in new episodes, because I think it's
indefensible on many levels.  I just don't think it's appropriate to make
the show into something less than it is to stay on the air; because then the
show you want to keep on the air, that which makes it special, is gone
anyway, so you've lost both ways.  Better to go out on your feet.  But we've
made it 3 years so far, and I have no intention of letting it fall before
finishing the storyline.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  Max Cacas, 76476,2472		Tuesday, October 10, 1995 3:29:21 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#363575

     I agree with you 100%.  They keep promising better; we'll see.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  DEBBIE PLOOR, 102662,3032	Wednesday, October 11, 1995 1:33:20 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#364225

     Debbie: thanks.  To avoid a lengthy recap of the O'Hare situation, I
would point you to the B5 library, sec 5, which has a lengthy message from
me on the subject, which should answer just about all of those questions.

     As for the second half of the "Babylon Squared" episode, and all the
questions arising from that...and your question about O'Hare returning...
they both have the same answer.  He'll be reappearing in season three in a
two-part episode that shows the other half of the B^2 storyline.

     Thanks for the kind words.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5: Final Year???		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Hugh Kennedy, 70042,710		Wednesday, October 11, 1995 1:33:18 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#364224

<What about international markets?>
     Unfortunately, that's considered by studio execs a "secondary market,"
of less interest, and less reward.  Also PTEN is a consortium of WB and the
stations; without the local stations, you got zip.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  Divided Loyalties		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Toni Muller, 75223,1575		Wednesday, October 11, 1995 1:33:23 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#364226

     Thanks; it's a good warm-up episode for the next three biggies....

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Keeping B5 ALIVE			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  The Jawa / Jawa #2, 76371,3057	Wednesday, October 11, 1995 11:22:26 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365276

     That's the point, you really couldn't pull a major thread without
unraveling a lot of stuff.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Keeping B5 ALIVE			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Anne L. Warner, 71513,1177	Wednesday, October 11, 1995 11:22:25 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365275

     The stations have a season two poster that's quite nice; suggest you
contact your local station and inquire if they have any left.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  WOTW: DS9 Imitates B5?		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Randy Hall, 74617,420		Wednesday, October 11, 1995 9:53:14 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365148

     Ah, I see the infamous Randy Hall of AOL is here, as well.

     In citing the DS9 ratings, you carefully omit the Voyager ratings, which
in many cases in the past have been somewhat *less* than the B5 ratings.
Which kinda takes the air out of the argument, doesn't it?

     Even so, B5 is challenging the ST universe artistically, in terms of
what we put on the screen.  As we hope they will challenge us.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  GARIBALDI COP STUFF		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Michael  Zitaglio, 102545,641	Wednesday, October 11, 1995 11:22:30 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365278

     The actors do not input into scripts in the writing process; they
interpret the script upon its completion.  In rare cases, they may ask for a
line or word change for performance purposes.  But the line you cite was from
Garibaldi's background.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 Story Thoughts		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Wednesday, October 11, 1995 11:22:31 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365279

     It's an old wound, and though I appreciate the question, I'd rather not
re-open it.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Wednesday, October 11, 1995 11:22:02 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365280

     The most difficult part on one level is probably the writing, because
that's the one time I'm up on the high-wire entirely by myself; in every
other aspect of the show, you've got other people, costume designers, EFX
people, others who can keep you from falling.  Behind the keyboard, if you
screw up, you've got no one to catch you.

     On another level, the most physically difficult is the editing process,
where we go over each episode frame by frame and edit it to within an inch
of its life.  It's a very detailed and wearing process.

     We definitely plan to do more with Lennier next season.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Telepaths on B5			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Wednesday, October 11, 1995 11:22:05 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365281

     Yes, both sides can pay the same telepath, since teeps have no vested
interest either way, and their honesty is held to the highest standards.  Or
you can get a second teep of your own.  And yes, there have been others on
B5, but usually passing through with the businessmen who hire them.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Kit Furness, 73574,44		Wednesday, October 11, 1995 11:45:01 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365311

     Thanks, and I think you'll like where we take that relationship in the
coming season as well....

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Neil Blevins, 102226,3566	Wednesday, October 11, 1995 11:45:02 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365312

     Remember, the *conscious* Talia did none of those things; she would
never dream of scanning without permission.  (And in Ivanova's case,
remember that she said she knows *instantly* if she's being scanned.  Note
her strong reaction in "Eyes" when it happens.)

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Deonaha M. Conlin, 102531,2627	Wednesday, October 11, 1995 11:45:04 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365314

     That's terrific, thank you...and glad to see another Dr. Pepper fan out
there....

     This one came out quite well...but compared to what's coming, man....

     Thanks again, and enjoy the marathon.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Joel Hilke, 74271,1016		Thursday, October 12, 1995 1:19:25 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365370

     There's little I could say about Jarvis' reviews for TV GUIDE that has
not already been said about Jack the Ripper.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Ellison CITY Note		Section: Star Trek
  To:  All				Thursday, October 12, 1995 1:19:27 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#365371

Harlan Ellison has requested that I post this in places where those likely
to have ordered the forthcoming CITY ON THE EDGE OF FOREVER limited-edition
hardcover can find it.

Message begins:

Here is the answerto the question of why a three-week delay in shipping THE
CITY ON THE EDGE OF FOREVER became necessary.

A minor production glitch.

Nothing more mysterious or ominous than that.

Once the book had gone to Thomson-Shore in Dexter, Michigan for printing,
and was in production, it was discovered that more than 150 corrections to
the text--some significant, others of a niggling nature--but all troublesome
to a greater or lesser degree--had slipped past, and had not been
integrated.

Tom Monteleone of Borderlands Press was out of the country.  But his
concerns for shipping on time--we've been paying the price for a premature
announcement of this title four years ago ever since that miscalculation was
made--were preeminent.  Nonetheless, because of my insistence that this book
(a book of great personal importance to me) be as close to perfect as
possible, I took the necessary action to hold the production at a pre-final
stage till Tom returned and we could get the changes made.

That has been accomplished.  Tom Monteleone has been very gracious in
accommodating my concerns, and the book is back in the tube at Thomson-Shore
right now.  Three weeks max is what Dave Raymond, Customer Services Manager,
tells us.  Three weeks and the book, a beautiful beautiful package, will be
in the hands of those who've ordered it.

It is unfortunate that Tom Monteleone's interim message on the Borderlands
Press 800-order line has been misinterpreted by some people.  All is well,
and the CITY is on its way to waiting eyes and hands.  Thank you for
asking.

                                                Harlan Ellison

Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Sharon Foster, 76360,301		Thursday, October 12, 1995 4:20:02 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366007

     Yeah, well, the great thing is that I've found a source for Drake's Cakes
out here in CA...


                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Steve Bennett, 70046,441		Thursday, October 12, 1995 4:20:11 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366011

<Have you ever seen a spy movie called Charlie Muffin?  Lots of twists.>

     Haven't seen that one, but I'll keep an eye out, thanks.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Chad Underkoffler, 102512,1310	Thursday, October 12, 1995 4:20:08 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366009

     Talia v 1.0 would not have violated Ivanova's privacy during any kind
of intimacy, as that would violate her profoundly; you can hold back, and
Talia would have, and Ivanova would've sensed if she had tried it.  The
theory on telepaths making love is that they both willingly drop the blocks
they normally keep in place.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  VOYAGER'S BAD TREK		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Rich Brown, 76372,706		Thursday, October 12, 1995 4:37:09 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366042

     Actually, according to a recent article in the Los Angeles Times, the
ratings for DS9 have been dropping about one point every season.  Not a
reflection on the quality of the show, those are just the numbers.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Lame Voyager Writing		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Jonah Fleisher, 73664,475	Thursday, October 12, 1995 4:37:11 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366043

     One solution to this, though, is what made this last episode of ST:V so
enjoyable.  Usually, when you watch a ST show, you get gang writing credits;
it goes through the hopper and gets filtered through so many other writers
that it loses its flavor.  Not to say they're not good writers, this is the
case on ANY show, on ANY script; the more people who stick their snouts into
a script, however individually talented, the overall quality of the script
diminishes, gets watered down.

     The episode this past Monday had just one name on it, and while I'm
sure there was some tinkering here and there, it wasn't enough for anyone to
take credit, which means the lion's share of the episode was written by this
single writer...and that made all the difference in the world.  The dialogue
was crisp and funny, the "voice" of the show was consistent throughout, it
moved well...it worked.

     The ST model is to work over scripts in-house to within an inch of
their lives...but frankly, sometimes it's better to leave the darned thing
alone.  This was a good example of that.  (I don't recall the writer's name
offhand, but if they're smart, they'll put him or her on staff asap.)

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Lame Voyager Writing		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Janelle Keberle, 73552,3243	Friday, October 13, 1995 8:52:10 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#367610

     Some shows just tend to have that as their guiding principle: rewrite
the hell out of it.  Others try as much as possible to leave it alone and
let the voice of the original writer come through.  I tend to fall more into
the latter camp.  In some cases, I revise heavily, but only where I feel
it's absolutely necessary.  Otherwise I leave it alone.  David Gerrold's
script for "Believers," for instance, is about 85% his.  DC Fontana's last
script for us was about 90% hers.  Just tweaks, mainly.

     According to an interview I saw with one of the main ST producers, they
use the "breaking the story" mode, which I've never much liked.  To wit: in
each and every case, they take the story, and gather in a room, and start
scattergunning ideas and arguments and plot points, which one person writes
down on a blackboard, crossing out some items while adding others.  Yeah,
it's a very democratic system, everybody gets their say...but I've always
felt, on other shows, that it tends to knock off all the corners when you do
that.  Doesn't mean good stuff can't get through -- obviously it does -- it
just makes it harder for it to do so, and this is the case for any show that
uses that approach.  At least, from my admittedly subjective point of view.
But trying to tell one person how to tell his or her stories is like telling
somebody how to make love...the advice is invariably unwanted, and usually
inappropriate.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  To: B5 producers/writers		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Terrill L. Burlison, 73631,275	Thursday, October 12, 1995 4:37:12 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366044

     No, nothing was cut; we had a matching problem at one point in the edit,
where Andrea reached with her left hand in one angle, and didn't reach out
with the other, and we had to come around for the shot on Ivanova, so it
looked a tick off.  But nothing was cut.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <DL speculations>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Greg Cronau, 76407,2311		Thursday, October 12, 1995 4:37:14 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366045

     An interesting thought...as for Bester's personality, keep an eye out
for "Dust to Dust," episode #6, where you see Bester from a different and
very interesting angle.  Some of what you say here, he says.  (Not about the
corps, but about doing what's right as he sees it.)

     'Course, whether or not one should *believe* anything he says is another
question altogether.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Telepaths on B5			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John McAuley, 100260,412		Thursday, October 12, 1995 9:09:15 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366422

     No, the teep you hire is not bound to *volunteer* that you're lying; if
asked by the other person, the teep would simply refuse to answer; which is
tantamount to saying that you're lying.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 at Farpoint			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Cynthia and Richard, 71561,3255	Thursday, October 12, 1995 9:09:16 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366423

     That's great, congratulations.  The costumes sound great.  And I enjoyed
speaking via phone at Farpoint; if I'd known some of the others couldn't
show, I probably would've stayed around longer.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 Story Thoughts		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Steven L. Wiser, 102633,3171	Thursday, October 12, 1995 9:09:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366424

     Thank you.  The episodes should make you wonder about tomorrow, and
think about the choices in our lives.  If it has succeeded in that, then the
effort is worthwhile.  Thanks again.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Neil Blevins, 102226,3566	Thursday, October 12, 1995 9:09:22 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366425

     A non-telepath can learn certain tricks to make it harder to break
through, albeit briefly, so the reaction was sufficiently ambiguous and the
event sufficiently brief that it wouldn't raise too many concerns.  Which is
why Sheridan dived in when he did; if she'd continue to block much longer,
just instinctively, it would've revealed her latent potential.  It was his
distracting Ivanova that in a sense helped Lyta break through.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  C Clark, 71643,65		Friday, October 13, 1995 11:16:10 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#367758

<Could Ivanova sense when someone else was being scanned?>

     No, that she wouldn't really be capable of doing at her present level.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Keeping B5 Alive!		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Refried Beans, 73737,3714	Thursday, October 12, 1995 9:09:28 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366427

     Well, we just this week hit the air with the final four of last year,
and we haven't even hit the year three ratings period in November, so at
this juncture I'd say it's premature to start worrying about some of this.
The best thing to do, for everyone, is to keep in constant touch with your
local stations, via letter, and let them know what you think about the show.
Because we live and die at the station level.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Elyse M. Grasso, 70302,3304	Thursday, October 12, 1995 11:15:27 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366588

     Each kind of takes their turn; G'Kar gets big stuff next year, and in
the final four.  His character starts to formalize a turn that's been going
on gradually for a while now.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Mira Furlan's "Butt"		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Michael Grabois, 74737,2600	Thursday, October 12, 1995 11:16:00 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#366589

     It was a long time ago, but I suspect that that's probably what I was
referring to.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5: Final Year???		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Hugh Kennedy, 70042,710		Friday, October 13, 1995 8:51:27 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#367606

     Insofaras I know, the stations don't share in the revenues from overseas
distribution, so their interest in it is negligible.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Jack the Ripper>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Brian A. Thomas, 75231,1122	Friday, October 13, 1995 8:52:00 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#367607

     Actually, I have my own suspicion about his identity, and have dug out
quite a bit of supporting evidence.  It's not a name anyone's heard before
in this context.  I've spoken with a few other high-credibility
Ripperologists, and apparently there are some others who have begun focusing
on this person.  So we'll see....

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Daena Hinkelman, 73554,1731	Friday, October 13, 1995 8:52:03 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#367608

     You won't have long to wait for the shadows to return; 6 days, to be
precise.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  WOTW: DS9 Imitates B5?		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Colin Knowles, 72152,201		Friday, October 13, 1995 8:52:06 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#367609

     Actually, we just got the overnights from the first day's ratings of
the first of the Final Four, and they're quite good...in LA, for instance,
where DS9 got a 5.9 rating and a 9 share, B5 got a 6.3 rating and a 10
share.  So we're getting there....

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Will Gearhart, 102147,2670	Friday, October 13, 1995 8:52:11 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#367611

     Overall, I'd think this is a better question *debated* by folks than
answered by me.  (And there's no one B5 answer, as there are so many varying
belief systems in the B5 universe.)  All I can suggest is that you keep an
eye out for an episode called "Passing Through Gethsemane," around #5 or so;
it may get into some of this.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  JMS: Please Read This!		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 102664,773	Friday, October 13, 1995 8:59:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#367619

     I've told that story enough times; I have an aversion to typing it all
out one more time....

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5: What Gives?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Carl BUSSJAEGER, 102065,1635	Saturday, October 14, 1995 1:09:15 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#367837

     You pays your money and you takes your chances; given that more and more
folks are starting to come to the party, I suspect that maybe the story is
doing its job.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  Thomas McDonough, 73641,474	Saturday, October 14, 1995 1:13:10 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#367840

     "With all due respect" is a term usually used (in addition to other
places) in military life; it's a way of disagreeing with a superior officer
without getting nailed for insubordination.  If it's used in that context a
lot, it's because that's how it's supposed to be used.

     "To be perfectly frank" doesn't serve the same purpose; the intent is,
"I disagree with your assessment, but that doesn't violate the respect your
position must demand of me."

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <What do they know?>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Michael W. Mahoney, 	Sunday, October 15, 1995 5:06:01 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#369765

     Basically, all that was indicated in the script was that he for a beat
isn't sure what's up...then lets it go.  I generally don't drop specific
points explaining foreshadowing in the scripts, in case they leak out.  If a
line like that isn't sufficiently clear for the actor's intent, they then
come to me and I explain it verbally.  This was done in particular when we
had to shoot "Chrysalis" before "Signs and Portents," even though the latter
aired before the former.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  Brains & Telepaths		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Scott Belgarde, 	Sunday, October 15, 1995 5:06:02 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#369766

     No, no direct corrolary between IQ and telepathic potential; it's a
matter of genetics, primarily.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  <Inquisitor Was?>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Eric Baker, 		Sunday, October 15, 1995 5:06:04 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#369767

     I've always been a big fan of Alan's work, but I just couldn't get into
this one, and gave up after the first couple issues.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  Ellison CITY Note		Section: Star Trek
  To:  GREG LASH, 74323,456		Sunday, October 15, 1995 5:06:08 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#369768

     The trade, I think, is a whole separate deal, so I have no info on that
one.  The limited delay is only another week or so.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  New Season			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Ron Russak, 		Sunday, October 15, 1995 5:06:11 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#369769

     Originally they were done on Amigas, but the software has now been
exported to PC platforms, so that's their venue now.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  B5 Repeat on KCOP?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Stephen C. Smith,	Sunday, October 15, 1995 5:06:16 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#369771

      No, there aren't any more repeats in LA or most markets; this is an
overall PTEN change.  You get one chance and one only.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Bob Perse,		Sunday, October 15, 1995 5:06:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#369772

     Certainly, a determined teep can get that information somehow....

                                                                       jms
Subj:  B5 Repeat on KCOP?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  The Jawa / Jawa #2, 	Sunday, October 15, 1995 8:43:14 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#370016

<I really do hate to nag, but any word on the videos?>

     If there were word, you wouldn't have to ask about it.

                                                               jms
Subj:  B5 Repeat on KCOP?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Steve Bennett,		Monday, October 16, 1995 11:22:24 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#371760

     My *guess* is that they'll show the last four again to start reruns, or
thereabouts.  I haven't seen a final schedule yet.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Will Gearhart,	Sunday, October 15, 1995 5:06:21 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#369773

     Oh, sure, I could tell you what *I* think is the absolute truth of the
metaphysical aspects of the B5 universe...but what would be the fun in that?

                                                                       jms
Subj:  New DS9 opening = B5?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Arthur Stoppe,	Sunday, October 15, 1995 8:39:09 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#370009

     I've actually received email from people who say they've been harrassed
by some of the more extreme ST fans for liking B5; one recent correspondent
sent me a note off the usenet describing when he went into an SF bookstore
(that also carried comics, soundtracks, other stuff), and was derided for
wanting the B5 soundtrack, made fun of, told the disk wasn't there, finally
found it hidden behind some other stuff, and endlessly insulted in a way
that was very openly hostile and mean-spirited.  It happens.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  New DS9 opening = B5?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Tom Trankle, 		Monday, October 16, 1995 3:14:14 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#370332

     I saw your prior note, and I'd have to say that probably most of the
items you cite as similarities in approach have to do with just about any
space-borne science fiction.  Many colony worlds, varying tech levels,
that's fairly generic.

     Definitely agree about the differences, though.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  New DS9 opening = B5?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Arthur Stoppe,	Tuesday, October 17, 1995 12:41:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#372229

     Yes, I've seen the elusive Chris Franke, who is actually a 2'3" Latino
with a broken nose and a tattoo covering both ears.  He hires this person to
pretend he's Chris.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  B5 Horror Element		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 	Sunday, October 15, 1995 8:43:16 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#370017

     In Zone, I tried as much as possible mainly to stick to the Serling
influence in my stories; that I felt was my primary obligation.

     "Gethsemane" isn't a horror-type story at all, though it does have a
very TZish feeling, so it doesn't owe to any of those.  Best to just let you
see it when it airs.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  Lame Voyager Writing		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Janelle Keberle,	Monday, October 16, 1995 3:14:09 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#370330

     Okay, here's intro lesson #5, on How Hollywood Works, by jms, age 12.

     Writers, the really *good* writers, are few and far between.  Sure,
you've got journeymen and journeywomen, people who can cobble up a decent
story, but the percentage of really *good* writers is the same as it is in
any other venue, a minority.  And of that sampling universe, smaller still
is the group that can write perfectly for *your show*.

     Writer A may be a great writer on series A, B and C, but when it comes
to show D, just doesn't Get It.  Every once in a very great while, someone
walks in the door, and absolutely nails it first time at bat.  That person
is *exactly* suited to your show.  So it's in your best interest to grab
that person and stick him on staff as fast as you humanly can.

     If you bring him in as a staff writer, he can't rewrite others, and
can't verbally participate in story sessions (per WGA rules) with freelance
writers.  His utility is limited, and since there isn't that much difference
in salary between a staff writer and a story editor, you usually bring the
person in as story editor.  Or, if the person has a lot of credits, you
bring him or her in as a producer.

     Hence the preponderance of writer/producers in TV, which has somewhat
become the norm.  Working through freelance scripts is a difficult thing on
the best of days, so there's an understandable impulse to hire a whole bunch
of writers who you know Get It, give them producer titles, and have them do
the lion's share of the writing.  This is how most TV shows are done today.
In a way, it's kind of diminished the title "producer," since many writer
producers don't really produce, it's just a title with more money.  You've
got producers, co-producers, associate producers, executive story editors,
story editors, supervising producers and executive producers.  And even
executive producers don't always participate in the day-to-day operation of
a series, so they've come up with a term that creates a subset of executive
producers, an unofficial term you'll never see on-screen, which is "Show
Runner."  That's the one person who is running the whole darned thing.

     Is all this fairly new?  Yeah, fairly.  There was a time when the
majority of TV shows were written by freelancers, but that was when the WGA
consisted of far fewer writers than today, and it was easier to dip into
that pool.  Now you've got well over 9,000 Writers Guild members, of which
roughly 50% are unemployed at any given moment.  That's a lot of people
scrambling to beat down your door at any moment, and when you factor in the
greater risks these days, the short orders (you used to get a full season's
order, 24 episodes, on networks, now you get 8, then if the ratings hold, 7
more, then a third order for the balance of episoodes, called the Back Nine,
which means you can risk less with outsiders in your first batch), that can
lead to a bunker mentality.

     Did I start out this way?  Sorta.  I've only written two freelance TV
scripts for dramatic series; each time I get hired instantly right
afterward.  On other shows, I'm just hired straight off, no freelance work
required.  I didn't actually set out to be a producer; it was never my plan,
or my goal.  Didn't want the Pointy Hat of Authority.

     But I discovered early on that the only way to make sure nobody rewrote
me, that the words got through as I wanted them to get through, was to go up
the ladder until I became an executive producer/show runner.  It's a hell of
a lot of work.  If someone said, "Look, we'll make you a staff writer, pay
you crappy money...but we won't change your words," I'd take it in a hot
second.  But that hasn't happened, so here I am...in the cannon barrel.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  "Inside Trek" column		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Michael Grabois, 	Monday, October 16, 1995 3:14:11 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#370331

<Did you see this past weekend's version of the "Inside Trek" column? It
On Saturday, they had an interview with Bruce Boxleitner.>

     Yeah, thanks, I'd love to see a copy....

								       jms

Subj:  B5 cards, etc...			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Phil Koltko, 		Monday, October 16, 1995 11:22:28 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#371761

     Because you're still hooked into the way the non-B5 world does things.
We're kind of obsessive about stuff here.

     Yes, I do have approval over everything, and while a few things
could've been better with the cards, I'm overall quite pleased.  It's a
start.  Remember, we're still in the process of convincing people that there
really is interest in the show, so the miracle isn't whether or not a given
product was done well, rather that it was done at *all*.  So these so far
are fine, and we'll continue to improve.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  B5 cards, etc...			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Phil Koltko,		Tuesday, October 17, 1995 6:36:05 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#372661

     Basically, when you go into someone else's company, as much as you may
advise, suggest, and carry on, ultimately it's not your company, and you're
bound by the way other people do business.

     Some people can license a product, for instance, but because the show
isn't a proven money-producer in licensing, they may want to hedge their
bets; they may not invest as much money into production, or publicity, or
artistic contributers of one sort or another.  So the choices you then get
to approve may not be the ultimate best  possible in a theoretical world in
terms of pushing the envelope or being as daring as the show.  Their
inclination is to  play it safe.

     As time goes on, and people become reassured that B5 products will work
for them, they will be more comfortable investing more money into them,
which in turn will attract more artistic types, which then leads to more
daring or unique stuff.

     The first few novels were, I thought, fairly prosaic; the next batch
are, I think, more interesting...because the book company is now putting a
little more effort and thought into the product, since the first 3 volumes
have very much proven their worth.  And the list of writers on the next
batch is very good, includng SM Stirling and Neal Barret Jr.

     It's a growing process....

                                                                       jms
Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  David Seraphin,	Monday, October 16, 1995 11:22:02 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#371763

<Many thanks for creating such a wonderful show!>

     Thanks, your support is very much appreciated.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  <Talia Winters>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Brian Kornfeld, 	Monday, October 16, 1995 11:22:08 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#371766

     1) You're assuming Bester knows everything.  Also, Bester's interest
may have been more...carnal than PsiCorp oriented.

     2) The real Talia was becoming more and more disenchanted with PC, and
this was in time going to pull her into resistance activities, which Talia
v2.0 would only be *thrilled* about.  The self-protection mechanism only
kicks in when the personality's existence is threatened.

     3) Remember that Ironheart was not seeing Talia under the best of
conditions...he was fighting hard NOT to use his abilities, for any reason,
because it created mindquakes...he was pulling everything IN.  And later he
was shot, also not a good position.

     It lays out fine, really.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <Talia Winters>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Pankaj Mangalik, 	Wednesday, October 18, 1995 2:06:05 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#373241

     Having written the episode, produced it, edited it, seen it at least 20
times, to synopsize it again, after all that, is something I really don't
think I'm up to, much as I'd like to....

                                                                       jms
Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  peter  stathis, 	Tuesday, October 17, 1995 12:41:18 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#372230

     The shadows influence is partly the gothic horror influence overall, and
a lot of Jungian influence.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Spencer W. Farrow, 	Wednesday, October 18, 1995 2:05:24 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#373236

<Drake's Cakes in CA?  Where?>

     Try Slices pizza on Van Nuys in Sherman Oaks; they sell 'em by the box.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  Back to the Beginning		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 	Wednesday, October 18, 1995 2:05:25 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#373237

<In "The Gathering," was the data Delenn gave Sinclair on the Vorlons really
*everything* -- including the First Ones, the Shadows, etc.?>

     Yeah, there was a lot of info there...it was everything she had *there*
at hand, but not everything the Minbari have overall.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  B5 Horror Element		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 	Wednesday, October 18, 1995 2:06:00 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#373238

     What many folks forget is that Serling's story were as often about
redemption as about damnation; about hope as often as about horror.  That
lesson is forgotten by many horror writers who claim him as influence.

     The Serling influence, for me, is the strength of individual humans to
endure much, sacrifice greatly, yet come out the other end of the struggle
something nobler and stronger.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  Talia/Garibaldi/Comic#8		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Allan  S. Nassau, Wednesday, October 18, 1995 2:06:02 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#373239

<Didn't Garibaldi see Talia in comic #8?  Why didn't he recognize her later?>

     Nope, he was looking at the process overall; he never saw Talia.  The
one shot of her is the omniscient POV, not his.  (And even if he had seen
her, it would've been only a glimpse of a blonde woman, no name that he
could see, and after so many years, given that her condition wasn't great at
the time, he wouldn't necessarily recognize her in any event.)  But it's a
moot point; the comic never indicated that he saw her.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  B5 via CON-RAD			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Grey Culberson,	Wednesday, October 18, 1995 2:06:03 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#373240

<Will you be at CON-RAD?>

     I've got some concerns about ConRad that I'm looking into; have to get
into that more before I comment.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <Divided Loyalties>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  The Jawa / Jawa #2	Wednesday, October 18, 1995 4:15:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#373788

<Nice episode (TLTS)!  Does the planet have a name?>

     Thanks; and the planet is Epsilon 3.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Talia/Garibaldi/Comic#8		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John McAuley		Wednesday, October 18, 1995 8:24:08 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#374131

     "...picture of Talia on conveyer with red net over her face."

     C'mon...you're saying anybody'd be able to recognize a flash image of 
a woman with a red net over her face as much as 7 years later...?

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Talia/Garibaldi/Comic#8		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John McAuley, 		Thursday, October 19, 1995 5:44:12 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#374675

     As I recall, the Winters, T badge was only visible in the next to last 
panel, which is a narrative flashback, not him personally.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  peter  stathis, 	Wednesday, October 18, 1995 4:15:12 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#373786

     If I were simply going to tell everyone what's going to happen, there 
would be little point in actually making the series, true?

                                                                       jms



Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Terry Cotant	Thursday, October 19, 1995 5:44:11 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#374674

<Can I get 3D models of the ships?>

     Unfortunately, we can't release that info outside the company for 
copyright reasons.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Ellison CITY Note		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Randall Chrisman, 	Wednesday, October 18, 1995 4:15:15 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#373787

     No "I told you so" involved; I've seen the galleys, there were 150 
major typos, it couldn't be released like that.  So correcting those took 
an additional 3 weeks.  Nothing to do with anything but production glitches
in manufacture.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  WOTW: DS9 Imitates B5?		Section: Star Trek
  To:  Michael Ogrinz, 	Wednesday, October 18, 1995 4:36:04 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#373808

     Not backwards at all when one considers that in general B5's ratings
have been slowly, consistently improving in non-rerun periods since it went
on the air.  No, it didn't start out in the top figures because it didn't
have the ST name that guarantees ratings.  It's had to find its audience,
and vice versa.  And this it has been doing.

     In LA, the first new episode of B5, aired right after a new DS9
episode, got a 6.3 rating and a 10 share, as opposed to a 5.3/9 for DS9.

     And even *absent* all that...even a lower rated show can challenge one
artistically.  Twin Peaks never got the big numbers, but it had a major
impact in breaking open some of the elements that others have used since, in
shows like X-Files and American Gothic and others.

     On this whole question...if you saw the DS9 2-hour debut, with the
action scenes, you may want to check out the show airing this week.  You
might find it interesting....

                                                                       jms


Subj:  No vcrs?				Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Sharon Foster, Thursday, October 19, 1995 1:09:01 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375031

<Would you have still attempted something as complex as Babylon 5 if VCRs 
were not as common as they are now?  
Say, ten years ago? Is it something you took into consideration at all?>

     The story is the story, regardless of the medium some might use to 
record them at home.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  No vcrs?				Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Arthur Stoppe,	Friday, October 20, 1995 1:16:22 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375871

     I've never given much thought to the home video market; I don't get a 
direct piece of it, and it's a secondary revenue stream as far as PTEN is 
concerned and thus not very important, as testified to by the fact that they 
still haven't even put any cassettes OUT in the US.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  No vcrs?				Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Sharon Foster,		Friday, October 20, 1995 1:16:25 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375872

     Well, even without VCRs, eventually the show will be stripped daily 
(one hopes, at least), once the show is over.  
Some here have tried, as an experiment, watching them straight through, one 
per day, and all the clues and bits and foreshadowings jump out immediately 
that way.  So it probably works fine either way.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <TLTS & Stuff>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Chad Underkoffler, 	Thursday, October 19, 1995 1:09:03 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375032

     Re: your note about 500 Narns for every 1 Centauri...you may want to 
check our own history.  During the occupation of some parts of Europe 
during WW II, similar tactics were used.  
In some cases the threat rose as high as 100-200 Jews or Russians executed 
for every Nazi killed; much the same has been done in earlier history.  
Five hundred to one is a figure relatively consistent with what humans have 
done from time to time when we wish to instill terror.  So I find this a 
curious quibble.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <TLTS & Stuff>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Philip Hornsey, 	Friday, October 20, 1995 1:24:19 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375889

     Actually, Londo *specifies* that the 500 will include "the 
perpetrator's own family."

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <TLTS & Stuff>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  SysOp Dupa T. Parrot,	Friday, October 20, 1995 1:16:25 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375873

<What's holding Londo to the deck? Velcro(tm)? Suction cups? The 
w\e\i\g\h\t\ mass of his sins? Something else?>

     Some races, like the Centauri and the Minbari, use drive systems built 
to varying degrees on magnetic and gravitational forces; 
some of them don't so much go to a planet as create a situation where they 
are drawn toward it. 
One of the side effects of this is a field allowing for artificial gravity. 
Earth doesn't have this level of technology, however.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <TLTS & Stuff>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Burhaan  Ahmad,	Friday, October 20, 1995 1:24:20 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375890

     Actually, what Delenn said was, "...the Rangers *in this area* are 
under my direct command."  So Sinclair's post as Ranger One remains back on 
Minbar.

     And yes, Sinclair has apparently been described as the One...but you 
must ask...the one *what*?

     Expect final answers to this one late this coming season.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <TLTS & Stuff>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Paul Maskens Thursday, October 19, 1995 7:42:23 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375537

     G'Kar's prayers would have been unrelated to the wounding of the 
shadow vessel.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  B5 Repeat on KCOP?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Paul C. Britton, 	Thursday, October 19, 1995 4:08:25 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375274

     Yes, I'm sorry, but B5 is now shown only once in most places, 
including LA.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <Long, Twilight Ques>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Kennedy How,		Thursday, October 19, 1995 7:37:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375531

<Draal's hookup to the machine is similar to the game Warhammer 40,000>

     No, never saw Warhammer.  The machine isn't primarily there to 
sustain, it's basically a control mechanism.  This game is a new one on me.

                                                                       jms
Subj:  Gary Numan and B5		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Michael  Zitaglio, 	Thursday, October 19, 1995 7:37:20 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375533

<An English techno-pop star has albums called Babylon 1, 2, 3>

     That's great; would love to hear one sometime.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  This week's sQ			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Trent K. Johnson, 	Friday, October 20, 1995 1:16:28 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#375874

<I noticed that this week's episode of seaQuest was written by Javier 
Grillo-(can't remember spelling).  This was the fellow who wrote the letter 
asking for opinions on how to fix the show wasn't it?>

     Since I didn't see it, I can have no real coherent thoughts (as if I 
could on any day)....

                                                                       jms

Subj:  No vcrs?				Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Arthur Stoppe,	Friday, October 20, 1995 8:08:05 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#376624

     Sure, I've given thought to it...<putting out B5 on videotapes> it's 
just getting WB to go along with it; they don't think anyone would want to 
buy them.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  No vcrs?				Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John McAuley,		Saturday, October 21, 1995 4:55:05 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#377417

     Unfortunately, 50% of the decision is made by the stations, which 
don't really care what happens outside the US.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <TLTS & Stuff>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Mark D. Smith,		Sunday, October 22, 1995 4:26:25 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#377984

<In this vein, at the last with Drall, I loved the part with Drall calling 
out for... Zathras!>

     Yeah, that was a rather Draal bit of humor, wasn't it?

                                                                       jms

Subj:  B5 Repeat on KCOP?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Paul C. Britton, 	Friday, October 20, 1995 8:08:07 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#376625

<Do you have any plans or thoughts on releasing a collection series?>

     Sooner or later, but not soon.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  Message report			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  The Jawa / Jawa #2,	Friday, October 20, 1995 8:08:09 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#376626

     Yes, ramoras live off shark leftovers.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  JMS: <LTS> SPOILER <?>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Alex Lau [FWB], 	Friday, October 20, 1995 8:08:13 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#376627

<The Vorlons lodged an official protest.  Was that the first time the
Vorlons acted so directly (since the eternal life episode, at least)?>

     Yeah, that's pretty much the first time since the pilot where the 
Vorlons got involved with the Sinclair situation.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  Starfury Q			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Donald A. McGrath I,	Friday, October 20, 1995 8:08:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#376628

     No, we've never had problems with the starfury design; our thought is 
that new models of fighters always come out, and we figured we'd introduce 
some newer models along the way.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  Babylon 5			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Darren Lane, 		Friday, October 20, 1995 8:16:21 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#376636

     It would be difficult to collapse everything into a fourth season.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <twilight struggle>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Rae Augenstein, 	Saturday, October 21, 1995 3:23:24 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#376898

      "So what you're saying is that they're the Borg."

      heh.  heh.

      C'mere.

      No, it'll be fine, just come over here for a minute, this won't 
hurt....

                                                                        jms

Subj:  <TLTS & Stuff>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Philip Hornsey,	Saturday, October 21, 1995 4:55:10 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#377418

     "A narn resistance is going to be pretty hard to organize."

     *Exactly* the issue we'll explore in "A Day in the Strife."  (Well, 
one of many issues.)

                                                                       jms

Subj:  Twilight Struggle		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Charles Agius,	Saturday, October 21, 1995 4:55:11 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#377419

     The cruiser is the same size as that sent to look into Z'ha'dum; it's 
just a matter of perspective and how close the camera gets.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  Londo Poisoned?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Jon A. Bell, 		Saturday, October 21, 1995 8:57:22 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#377725

     No, we'd never do anything that basically unfair to the viewers....

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <The Long, Twilight Str>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Jason Wong,		Saturday, October 21, 1995 8:57:23 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#377726

<I am totally stunned and speechless from this episode.  Joe, let me tell 
you, I CRIED in this episode.>

     Thanks.  I'm very pleased with that episode; your response was just 
what I was hoping for.  Thanks again.

                                                                       jms

Subj:  <Twilight Struggle>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Neil Blevins, 	Saturday, October 21, 1995 10:49:09 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#377844

     The reason for the placement of the jump points is *very* straight 
forward.

     By virtue of their size and the tremendous forces unleashed by punching
a hole into hyperspace, you want to form it a little distance away or risk
being severely damaged. If they formed the points between them and the
enemy, which was quite capable of avoiding them, it would be entirely
possible for the shadows to get in front of the point and cut off their sole
means of escape.  Usually, better to form them behind you, so the enemy
can't block your way out, and take a possible hit or two to your aft
sections than be totally cut off.  They didn't anticipate the extra weapons
the shadows had.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Bab5 cancellation HELP		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Dale Duncan,		Saturday, October 28, 1995 6:44:28 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#385876

      What you can also do, btw, is get together lots of other folks, using 
SF and comic stores, to sign a petition and go to another station and urge 
them to pick it up once it becomes available.  This has worked in other 
places.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Telepathic Vorlons		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Michael  Zitaglio,	Wednesday, October 25, 1995 10:16:05 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#382840

      They have certain potentialities, but I'd rather not go into them 
here quite yet.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <spoiler: Comes the Inq>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Marte Brengle, 	Wednesday, October 25, 1995 10:16:06 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#382841

     Short of convincing them via pressure, I can't think of anything.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Influence?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Terry Cotant [RSS],	Wednesday, October 25, 1995 10:16:08 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#382842

     No, had nothing to do with Q, it's deciding what kind of person our 
Mr. Sebastian might've been, and working from  there.  When you have 
a character with as vivid and powerful as his, you don't need 
to look to ST for any ideas on character.  And unlike Q, Sebastian has no
powers of his own, just the force of his personality.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Influence?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Terry Cotant [RSS], 	Thursday, October 26, 1995 8:07:17 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#383837

     Wayne has primarily done stage work, not a lot of TV, he's kind of a 
find.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Influence?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Ray Pelzer,		Sunday, October 29, 1995 3:37:25 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386238

     Okay, here's one clue for any would-be Ripperologists out there.

     In all the long story of Jack, when he was out doing his nightly work,
only one person, a woman, wrote an actual letter, published in the London
Times, offering an *explanation* for the Ripper's work, arguing that he was
trying to send a message, that maybe people should listen to that message.
It was as close as anyone's ever come to an actual *defense* of what he was
doing.

     Note the woman's name, and who her husband was...a man who was twice
interviewed by Scotland Yard, and interviewed by many Church officials, the
transcripts of which have been *sealed* by the Church ever since, at the
request of the family...a person who was the last man to see at least one of
the victims alive...and who was a direct blood relative of the man who was
living with the final victim (who was killed indoors, leading to the
speculation that she knew her assailant)...who suffered a breakdown just
before the murders began, was obsessed with cleaning up the Whitechapel
area, and after whose sudden, hasty transfer, the murders stopped...and
whose profession is tied *directly* to the only thing the Ripper was
overheard to say to one of his victims.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Twilight Struggle >		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Elyse M. Grasso, 	Wednesday, October 25, 1995 10:16:14 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#382844

<Just another note of appreciation.... now that I've finally seen TLTS, I 
can't find adequate words to describe its impact. >

      Thanks...and the amazing thing is, it continues to improve....

                                                                       jms



Subj:  Londo's Cough			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Nigel Nixon, 		Thursday, October 26, 1995 12:34:30 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#383256

      Not that it just looked better per se, but the gunshots came from 
right to left; the gun hand as originally shot fired from left to right.  
It looked very funky when edited together, like it was going in a different 
direction than the one it was fired in.  Flopping the shot corrected that.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <CtI---OK>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Jan Fennick,		Thursday, October 26, 1995 12:37:18 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#383257

     "catch me a kvetch, find me a flarn...."

                                                               jms*


     (Who woke up this morning humming "While My G'Kar Gently Weeps")

Subj:  Videotapes from jms		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Marte Brengle, 	Thursday, October 26, 1995 2:18:31 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#383382

     In answer to your question (383177)....

     As you've noted, the Powers That Be at Warner Bros. don't think there 
is a market for B5 tapes, from the first season to present.  The *only* way 
that they can ever be released is if the fans themselves take action.  
That is the absolute bottom-line.  Only if the fans speak out will this 
happen. This is not a drill, and I don't pass along this kind of information 
lightly or often, even when requested, as was done here.

     The primary contact, who can make the decision, is Mr. James Cardwell,
Executive Vice-President/General Manager, Warner Bros. Home Video, North
American Division, 3903 W. Olive, Building 154, 3rd Floor, Burbank, CA 91522.

     I do not anticipate posting this elsewhere, to avoid the appearance of 
encouraging a deluge.  The question has come up here repeatedly, and I
answered finally.  If others choose to take this message from CIS and post
it elsewhere, that's certainly their option.

     At this point, since WB has no plans to rerun the first season due to 
concerns that the presence of a different CO might confuse viewers, 
this is about the only way for folks who saw, or missed, the first season to 
catch up on all that went before.  (Obviously when the show is over completely,
 the episodes will go into syndication, but that is, presumably, 3 years 
down the road.)

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Videotapes from jms		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Esther Schindler [EXEC], Saturday, October 28, 1995 12:13:20 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#385117

     I think giving out the fax number might tend to clog it, which they 
might kinda object to.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Fan mail				Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Jane Killick, Thursday, October 26, 1995 2:18:00 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#383383

     Fan mail can be sent to all involved in making B5 at the following 
address: c/o Babylon 5, 14431 Ventura Boulevard, Suite 260, Sherman Oaks, CA
91423.  The c/o must be included.

                                                                       jms



Subj:  <spoiler: Comes the Inq>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Chad Underkoffler,	Thursday, October 26, 1995 2:18:02 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#383384

      The episode underlines that there are two fundamental questions in 
B5: who are you, and what do you want?  The order in which you answer
those two questions can either make you great...or destroy you.

      As for "There...plain truth!"  Someone elsewhere noted that this is 
how we work sometimes...we hand you our play book quite openly, we tell
you we're coming right up the middle, try and stop us.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <spoiler: Comes the Inq>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Joe Walters,		Friday, October 27, 1995 2:07:00 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#384517

      Yeah, that's about the right reaction to Sebastian.  As for the next 
week's scenes...well, at least the really major thing wasn't shown.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <CtI -- Question>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Marlyn Bumpus, 	Thursday, October 26, 1995 8:07:14 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#383835

<How did Lennier know where to find Delenn?>

     Well, given Delenn's position, I think she'd have let Lennier know 
where she was, or that he'd heard Sheridan tell Delenn in the scene we 
played the voice-over.

     Thanks, it was a good show.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <CtI -- Question>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 	Saturday, October 28, 1995 9:47:04 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386114

<Where do you see Lennier and Delenn having been, and where do you 
see the two of them going?  My commendations to Mira on her 
acting in this one.  Thanks for a terrific episode.>

     Yes, Mira's great in that episode.

     As for Lennier...it's an unusual relationship, which you'll learn a 
LOT more about in "Ceremonies of Light and Dark."  Which is all I can say
for now.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Archetypes			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 	Thursday, October 26, 1995 8:07:15 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#383836

     That's the kind of thing I don't tend to dwell on overmuch, lest the 
storytelling become self-conscious.  The more you start to over-analyze the
work as you're doing it, the less fresh and spontaneous it becomes.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644Saturday, October 28, 1995 6:44:25 
PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#385875

     Sysops:

     As a note, there's probably no reason to repost this message again; I 
think it might be overkill, and while I felt it 
was right to come in here once to announce this, it *is* the ST section and 
shouldn't have to put up with multiple 
raids of the same message.

     As an aside, Majel is shooting this week on B5, and so far seems to be 
enjoying it immensely.  She's having great fun working with Peter Jurasik 
and Stephen Furst.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Elizabeth Whitaker, 74541,613	Saturday, October 28, 1995 2:30:25 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#385578

<I saw a mention of Bruce Boxleitner's coming on board in an issue of 
TV Guide and decided to make an effort to check on the show -- and got 
hooked.

Episodes of Babylon5 really are like reading a chapter of a science fiction 
novel every week.> 

     Thanks, and I'm glad you made it to the show.  Bruce is nothing but 
terrific to work with.  And I think you'll like where we're going over the
next 6 weeks in particular....

                                                               jms


Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  The Jawa / Jawa #2, 	Saturday, October 28, 1995 9:47:31 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386111

<Talia is now Corps.  Whatever Ironheart gave her, Psi Corps has.
Is that, uh, a problem?>

      Logically, yes, that would eventually pose a problem.

                                                               jms

Subj:  <Comes the Inquisitor>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Sharon Foster, 76360,301		Saturday, October 28, 1995 2:30:26 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#385579

<"Omigod. Omigod. Omigod. Omigod. Omigod. But you can't do that on 
television. Nobody's ever done that on television!" ...>

     You know, you say the *nicest* things....

                                                                       jms



Subj:  <Comes the Inquisitor>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  David Fox,		Saturday, October 28, 1995 6:58:22 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#385910

     The pain is necessary because it's easy to consider laying down one's 
life intellectually; when the pain and the agony bring it home, it's no
longer as easy.

     And there *is* no correct answer to "Who are you?"  The only real 
answer is no answer, because as soon as you apply someone's term for it, 
you have limited yourself, defined yourself in someone else's terms.

     Doing things in a refined, gentle, intellectual manner is the sort of 
thing Delenn's used to, she can handle that easily...the goal of Sebastian 
was to try and *break* her.  That's not intended to be done gently.  You
don't break someone over a cup of tea discussing philosophical concepts and
the nature of personal identity.  It's also not terribly dramatic to watch.

     Because of her position, rank and authority, she expected to be 
treated a certain way...which was why it was important to treat her just 
the opposite.  It's easy to put oneself into a grand prophecy, to assume
one has a destiny...to pay the price for that is something else again.  
Anyone can do the former; very few can ever do the latter.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <CTI> Did Sinclair pass?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  David E. Francis, 72047,2070	Saturday, October 28, 1995 9:47:00 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386112

    <Did Sinclair have to undergo a similar interrogation?  Good show.>

     Bear in mind, though, that we don't yet know, when someone says The 
One, the answer to, "The One *what*?"  When this gets answered later this
season, you may have your answer there.

     And thanks.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <TLTS & Stuff>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Richard M. Perry, 76461,2737	Saturday, October 28, 1995 9:47:02 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386113

     Hey, I gotta have *some* fun here, right?  Can't make it too easy.  If 
I just answered all the questions, wouldn't be much point in making the show,
now would there?

                                                                       jms



Subj:  <Inquisitor--Mira, etc>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Mara K. Malovany, 	Saturday, October 28, 1995 9:47:08 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386115

     I think that, in the long run, the vorlons and the shadows will answer 
the questions Who are you and What do you want...in that that's kind of 
what they *are*, if that makes any sense.

     Well, it will.  Eventually.

     Funny thing is, how much as you note the show corresponds to some of
the things Mira's been through...some of it intentional, knowing that if I
dig into this area, it'll come out of her with the ring of truth...some of
it quite unintentional.  When I finished writing "Severed Dreams," and the
actors got it, Mira's first words to me were, "So...how long DID you live in
Yugoslavia?"  The parallel wasn't intentional...but it fit.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Milwaukee Affiliate		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Bob Perse, 		Saturday, October 28, 1995 9:47:09 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386116

     Yes, most stations now are only showing the episodes once per week not 
twice.  So if you want to get it, it has to happen the first time at bat.

     "I am seething here."

     So when you called the station, did that make it a seething ring?

                                                                       jms

Subj:  Influence?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Richard P. Manny,	Sunday, October 29, 1995 2:57:03 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386727

<I've never heard this one although I've read a number of Ripper texts.  I 
could cheat and ask for a reference, but I won't.  I'll do a little digging.>

     That's because it isn't *in* any of the Ripper texts as a suspect....

                                                                       jms



Subj:  Bab5 cancellation HELP		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Marion J Nalepa,	Sunday, October 29, 1995 2:57:00 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386726

     The stations that keep the show consistent do well with it, and don't 
usually drop it.  So you're probably in good shape here.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <spoiler>Comes the Inq		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Rick Corey /NY	Sunday, October 29, 1995 2:57:16 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386729

      I guess also that the key to avoid something becoming cliche is to 
turn it on its head.  Which was the case with Sebastian.  One thing I
neglected to mention was the need to have an absolute mirror-counterpoint to
Morden.  Here you've got the smiling, pleasant, utterly charming and good
looking fellow who is our "mirror" if you will in which we see the Shadows
reflected.  So now you need something dark and ominous and terrible as the
mirror through which we briefly glimpse the Vorlons, which has to be done
all in one episode, you can't develop it gradually as with Morden.  So
everything about Sebastian was the opposite of Morden...and each is the
opposite of what they represent.  As it appears to us now, anyway.

      To the question of Crowley, I've read a little of his work, but only a 
little...  I've never believed in the dictum of "Do what thou wilt shall be
the whole of the law."  I've generally leaned in the direction of "Do what
thou ought shall be the whole of the law." Crowley was a very strange man,
and while clearly some of his reputation was blown out of all proportion --
was he not kicked out of an entire country once, called The Most Evil Man Of
All Time? -- but at the heartmeat core of it was something dark and tw

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <spoiler: Comes the Inq>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Deonaha M. Conlin, 	Sunday, October 29, 1995 2:57:18 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386730

	<<OF course, that raises the question -- Is penance enough?>

	At some point, it must be.  Even the worst of us must have some
hope for reprieve at some point.  Either let the creep out of jail, or kill
him.  I think four hundred years of not knowing would even do justice to
Manson. ...>

     No, I think your points are all excellent, and tie right into the whole 
question at hand.  Nothing soft about them, just very thoughtful and
insightful.  One of the primary functions of the show, beyond entertainment,
is to provoke questions, discussion, and the comparison of views.

     I think my message titled videotapes from jms is still here with an 
address for WB about tapes.

     And thanks.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <CTI> Did Sinclair pass?		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Don Chase		Sunday, October 29, 1995 2:57:20 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#386731

<< When this gets answered later this season, you may have your answer 
there.>

Is that this season, as in Season 2, or Season 3?>

     I think I was referring here to season 3.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Comes the Inquistor>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Don Chase,		Sunday, October 29, 1995 8:09:22 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#387083

     Can G'Kar grow to forgive?  I don't think so...and yet in a way he must 
come to something more than rage, and other than forgiveness.  There is an 
important step in his development yet to come.  And he will have to go there
by a very hard road.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  Major B5/ST News			Section: Star Trek
  To:  JAMES M. TRAPP,	Sunday, October 29, 1995 8:14:10 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#387093

<Neither my wife nor I particularly care for what seems to be never 
ending plot lines.>

      That's great, and I appreciate the honest answer.  Not every show is 
for everyone.  Continued good luck.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <CtI---OK>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  John M. Kahane, 	Sunday, October 29, 1995 8:14:12 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#387095

< >> Actually, there *was* a scene where Lennier, concerned, tracks down Kosh 
to inquire after Delenn's situation, which report alarms him and sends him 
after Sheridan.  It was filmed...but cut for time. <<
  Can you post it?>

     Can't really post that kind of stuff, alas....

                                                                       jms




Subj:  Avalon?				Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Elyse M. Grasso,	Monday, October 30, 1995 2:35:16 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#387324

<Does the episode title "A Late Delivery from Avalon" imply that Jinxo will 
be back?>

     Nope, no Jinxo.

                                                                       jms



Subj:  <Comes the Inquisitor>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Mark D. Smith, 		Monday, October 30, 1995 2:35:16 AM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#387325

<When Delenn delivers her speach about "this body is only a shell", at 
the end of it, watching Sebastion, the dissapointment on his face!  To me, 
he looked like Delenn had just kneed his jewels up around his ears!>

      Yeah, beautiful subtle work, wasn't it...?

      Wayne Alexander.  Remember the name.  This guy's gonna Be Somebody.

                                                                       jms



Subj:  <CtI---OK>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Sharon Foster, 		Monday, October 30, 1995 6:15:24 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#387966

<What was the last word in Sebastian's "What about..." litany?>

      Actually, the last one, since it was going to be drowned out, was an 
adlib, "eternity."

                                                                       jms

Subj:  Fan club update?			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Marlyn Bumpus, 	Monday, October 30, 1995 6:15:27 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#387968

     Still processing paperwork...my life is paperwork.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <Comes the Inquistor>		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  DAVID F. LATORRE, 	Monday, October 30, 1995 6:15:30 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#387970

<<gasp><awe>Thanks for the wonderful coda by the Inquisitor.>

     Thanks....

                                                                       jms



Subj:  Episodes Evaluation		Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Dan F. Evan, 		Monday, October 30, 1995 10:33:10 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#388277

<Have you won any awards for the show yet?  Kosh was spectacular.>

     We've only won one Emmy and a couple of small awards for the series 
(plus another Emmy for the pilot).  We're still working on making people
aware that we're here, and what we're doing.

     Other than that...thanks.

                                                                       jms


Subj:  <TFON - Keffer>			Section: Babylon 5
  To:  Bob Danielson,		Monday, October 30, 1995 10:33:11 PM
From:  J. Michael Straczynski, 71016,1644#388278

<Is Keffer dead?>

     Dead as the proverbial doorknob.

                                                                       jms

